\subsection{Abstract}
Calculations of acoustic \ac{TL} in the ocean are useful in naval and
ocean monitoring applications. These \ac{TL} calculations are often
uncertain because they are based on uncertain environmental
parameters, but standard methods for determining \ac{TL} uncertainty
are computationally expensive. This paper describes how \ac{TL}
statistics in a range-depth area surrounding the point of interest
within a single \ac{TL}-field calculation can be efficiently used to
estimate the \ac{PDF} of \ac{TL} that results from ocean environment
uncertainty. Such area-statistics estimated \acp{PDF} of \ac{TL} are
compared to PDFs of \ac{TL} obtained from 1000-sample Monte-Carlo
calculations at source frequencies of 100, 200 and 300 Hz and source
depths of 91, 137, and 183 m in four different uncertain ocean
environments at test location depths from 20 m to 5 km and
source-receiver ranges from a few km to more than 60 km. These
comparisons show that the estimated \acp{PDF} of \ac{TL} are
engineering-level accurate in 93\% of tests in ocean environments with
consistent bottom reflection, and can be produced with O(10$^{-6}$)
the computational effort required for the Monte-Carlo calculations. In
deep refracting environments, area statistics was engineering-level in
78\% of test cases after algorithm adjustments.

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "../../prelim"
%%% End:
